Day 11. The Draftsman, and the lifecycle's honest edges. A policy's past
justification was already verifiable; nothing measured present relevance, and
nothing helped the human draft the next version from evidence instead of
intuition. The Draftsman is the drafting bench: rot review, use-case research,
overlap checks, and a validated draft — every number carrying the BigQuery job
id that produced it. It suggests; it never grants.

Identity note, stated rather than hidden: proposer-sa holds no read on the
policy registry, so the registry-reading subcommands below carry
--impersonate notary-sa — a reader that, like every principal except
examiner-sa, has no standing on the sealed exam. Granting proposer-sa its own
dataset-level READER on `policy` is the operator's one-command follow-up.

Which active rules still earn their place, measured on live fleet conduct:

$ python3 -m caseharden.draftsman \
    --impersonate notary-sa@devpost-hackathon-506416.iam.gserviceaccount.com \
    rot --window-days 30
rule rot over the last 30 day(s) of conduct_live denials   job europe-west3:job_m6GCvy3Ynh7--DeihauntMtU4pec

  line              version   rule                                    denials  last fired            verdict
  conduct-policy    v5        out-of-declared-scope                         0  -                     DORMANT
  conduct-policy    v5        tool-call-on-injected-turn                   27  2026-08-26T19:58:24Z  EARNING
  conduct-policy    v5        cross-tenant-tool-call                        0  -                     DORMANT
  conduct-policy    v5        tool-call-on-suspected-injection-turn         2  2026-08-25T17:32:13Z  EARNING
  payments-policy   v1-pay    large-refund                                  0  -                     DORMANT

  DORMANT states a rot candidate. Retirement widens authority and stays a human decision.
  Counts group denials by rule id across the versions that enforced them; a rule id is unique within a policy.

Two of v5's four rules have denied nothing in 30 days — stated, not retired.
large-refund is dormant for the honest reason: payments-policy is a served
floor, and enforcement is conduct-policy's alone.

What the payments use case actually looks like, from the drafting corpus:

$ python3 -m caseharden.draftsman patterns --use-case payments --window-days 30 --dataset conduct_train
payments conduct over the last 30 day(s) in conduct_train

  tool volume   job europe-west3:job_WO2040IxnQEa9UC1b3TBgr0pHZIn
    issue_refund                    176 call(s)  (no decisions recorded here)

  amount_cents distribution   job europe-west3:job_Jcb_hB7KbJtPUIrpfUhHOkmA797U
    176 call(s), quartiles [286, 2319, 5273, 12088, 110275], max 110275

  sessions with 3+ refund-ish calls, top 10   job europe-west3:job_wSMnpZTRBM3OoL7Xq7jRZ7iwMMmU

  These numbers are the evidence a human proposes a family taxonomy from. The tool proposes nothing itself.

The training corpus predates enforcement, and the report says so instead of
inventing a deny share. With --narrate, Gemini reads the report and suggests
rule shapes — among them velocity rules the deny-only DSL cannot express, and
a note that the corpus records no decisions. The narration is printed under
"model narration (a suggestion, not evidence)": the model proposes, the closed
vocabulary constrains, the gate decides.

A first draft of v2-pay, probed for conflicts before anything is written:

$ python3 -m caseharden.draftsman \
    --impersonate notary-sa@devpost-hackathon-506416.iam.gserviceaccount.com \
    overlap --candidate drafts/v2-pay-probe.json
large-refund vs payments-policy/v1-pay/large-refund: DUPLICATE — the same predicate set already exists in that line
cross-tenant-refund vs conduct-policy/v5/cross-tenant-tool-call: COVERED — that line already denies everything this draft rule denies; the draft rule is redundant

The DUPLICATE is the carry-forward habit, correct in its own line. The COVERED
is the conflict this exists to catch: cross-tenant denial is conduct-policy's
business, and a payments copy would be a second owner for one behaviour. The
human drops it, and the final draft goes through the closed DSL vocabulary:

$ python3 -m caseharden.draftsman \
    --impersonate notary-sa@devpost-hackathon-506416.iam.gserviceaccount.com \
    draft --version v2-pay --line payments-policy \
    --rules drafts/v2-pay-rules.json --out policies/v2-pay-candidate.json
overlap against the active registry:
  large-refund vs payments-policy/v1-pay/large-refund: DUPLICATE — the same predicate set already exists in that line

wrote policies/v2-pay-candidate.json
  line     payments-policy
  version  v2-pay
  rules    2
  the gate and a human approval still stand between this file and authority
  next     python3 -m caseharden.notary promote --version v2-pay --parent <parent> --candidate policies/v2-pay-candidate.json --policy-id payments-policy

The draft cannot become authority tonight, and the system says so twice, in
its own words. An adversarial scope review of this change found that a second
genesis would have silently replaced the line's active floor; that path now
refuses:

$ python3 -m caseharden.notary genesis --version v2-pay \
    --policy policies/v2-pay-candidate.json --policy-id payments-policy
REFUSED — payments-policy already has 1 version(s) (v1-pay), so this is not its genesis. Replacing what is in force is a promotion, and a promotion needs the line's sealed exam.
v2-pay was not registered and nothing was written.

$ python3 -m caseharden.notary promote --version v2-pay --parent v1-pay \
    --candidate policies/v2-pay-candidate.json --policy-id payments-policy
REFUSED — payments-policy has no sealed exam, so the gate cannot measure a candidate against evidence. The line stays at its registered floor.
v2-pay was not promoted and nothing was written to the chain.

The bench also refuses its own paths to the exam, found by the same review:

$ python3 -m caseharden.draftsman patterns --use-case payments --window-days 30 --dataset holdout_sealed
REFUSED — holdout_sealed is exam material, and the drafting bench never reads the exam.

$ python3 -m caseharden.draftsman --impersonate examiner-sa@... rot --window-days 30
REFUSED — the drafting bench does not run as the sealed exam's one reader. The wall between drafting and the exam is the point.

And nothing above moved what is in force, re-checked live:

$ SELECT version, policy_id, active FROM policy.versions ORDER BY promoted_at
  v3      conduct-policy   false
  v4      conduct-policy   false
  v5      conduct-policy   true
  v1-pay  payments-policy  true

$ python3 -m caseharden.notary verify --version v5   (tail)
  root 40cdb5962d490c4c68c5be74805e19c06d3eeab5c6b751765070efe2a2accced
  ATTESTED   re-derived from raw events in 3.2s
